I  
 
 
 
Annexure 
Syllabus for BITSAT-2026 
Part I: Physics 
1. Units & Measurement 
1.1 Units (Different systems of units, SI units, fundamental and derived units) 
1.2 Dimensional Analysis 
1.3 Precision and significant figures 
1.4 Fundamental measurements in Physics (Vernier calipers, screw gauge, Physical balance etc) 
2. Kinematics 
2.1 Properties of vectors 
2.2 Position, velocity, and acceleration vectors 
2.3 Motion with constant acceleration 
2.4 Projectile motion 
2.5 Uniform circular motion 
2.6 Relative motion 
3. Newton’s Laws of Motion 
3.1 Newton’s laws (free body diagram, resolution of forces) 
3.2 Motion on an inclined plane 
3.3 Motion of blocks with pulley systems 
3.4 Circular motion – centripetal force 
3.5 Inertial and non-inertial frames 
4. Impulse and Momentum 
4.1 Definition of impulse and momentum 
4.2 Conservation of momentum 
4.3 Collisions 
4.4 Momentum of a system of particles 
4.5 Center of mass 
5. Work and Energy 
5.1 Work done by a force 
5.2 Kinetic energy and work-energy theorem 
5.3 Power 
5.4 Conservative forces and potential energy 
5.5 Conservation of mechanical energy 
6. Rotational Motion 
6.1 Description of rotation (angular displacement, angular velocity and angular acceleration) 
6.2 Rotational motion with constant angular acceleration 
6.3 Moment of inertia, Parallel and perpendicular axes theorems, rotational kinetic energy 
6.4 Torque and angular momentum 
6.5 Conservation of angular momentum 
6.6 Rolling motion 
7. Gravitation 
7.1 Newton’s law of gravitation 
7.2 Gravitational potential energy, Escape velocity 
7.3 Motion of planets – Kepler’s laws, satellite motion 

II  
8. Mechanics of Solids and Fluids 
8.1 Elasticity 
8.2 Pressure, density and Archimedes’ principle 
8.3 Viscosity and Surface Tension 
8.4 Bernoulli’s theorem 
9. Oscillations 
9.1 Kinematics of simple harmonic motion 
9.2 Spring mass system, simple and compound pendulum 
9.3 Forced & damped oscillations, resonance 
10. Waves 
10.1 Progressive sinusoidal waves 
10.2 Standing waves in strings and pipes 
10.3 Superposition of waves, beats 
10.4 Doppler Effect 
11. Heat and Thermodynamics 
11.1   Kinetic theory of gases 
11.2 Thermal equilibrium and temperature 
11.3 Specific heat, Heat Transfer - Conduction, convection and radiation, thermal conductivity, 
Newton’s law of cooling Work, heat and first law of thermodynamics 
11.4 2nd law of thermodynamics, Carnot engine – Efficiency and Coefficient of performance 
12. Electrostatics 
12.1 Coulomb’s law 
12.2 Electric field (discrete and continuous charge distributions) 
12.3 Electrostatic potential and Electrostatic potential energy 
12.4 Gauss’ law and its applications 
12.5 Electric dipole 
12.6 Capacitance and dielectrics (parallel plate capacitor, capacitors in series and parallel) 
13. Current Electricity 
13.1 Ohm’s law, Joule heating 
13.2 D.C circuits – Resistors and cells in series and parallel, Kirchoff’s laws, potentiometer and 
Wheatstone bridge 
13.3 Electrical Resistance (Resistivity, origin and temperature dependence of resistivity). 
14. Magnetic Effect of Current 
14.1 Biot-Savart’s law and its applications 
14.2 Ampere’s law and its applications 
14.3 Lorentz force, force on current carrying conductors in a magnetic field 
14.4 Magnetic moment of a current loop, torque on a current loop, Galvanometer and its conversion 
to voltmeter and ammeter 
15. Electromagnetic Induction 
15.1 Faraday’s law, Lenz’s law, eddy currents 
15.2 Self and mutual inductance 
15.3 Transformers and generators 
15.4 Alternating current (peak and rms value) 
15.5 AC circuits, LCR circuits 
16. Optics 
16.1 Laws of reflection and refraction 
III  
16.2 Lenses and mirrors 
16.3 Optical instruments – telescope and microscope 
16.4 Interference – Huygen’s principle, Young’s double slit experiment 
16.5 Interference in thin films 
16.6 Diffraction due to a single slit 
16.7 Electromagnetic waves and their characteristics (only qualitative ideas), Electromagnetic 
spectrum 
16.8 Polarization – states of polarization, Malus’ law, Brewster’s law 
17. Modern Physics 
17.1 Dual nature of light and matter – Photoelectric effect, De Broglie wavelength 
17.2 Atomic models – Rutherford’s experiment, Bohr’s atomic model 
17.3 Hydrogen atom spectrum 
17.4 Radioactivity 
17.5 Nuclear reactions: Fission and fusion, binding energy 
18. Electronic Devices 
18.1 Energy bands in solids (qualitative ideas only), conductors, insulators and semiconductors; 
18.2 Semiconductor diode – I-V characteristics in forward and reverse bias, diode as a rectifier; I-V 
characteristics of LED, photodiode, solar cell, and Zener diode; Zener diode as a voltage regulator. 
18.3 Junction transistor, transistor action, characteristics of a transistor; transistor as an amplifier 
(common emitter configuration) and oscillator 
18.4 Logic gates (OR, AND, NOT, NAND and NOR). Transistor as a switch. 
 
 
Part II: Chemistry 
1. States of Matter 
1.1 Measurement: Physical quantities and SI units, Dimensional analysis, Precision, Significant figures. 
1.2 Chemical reactions: Laws of chemical combination, Dalton’s atomic theory; Mole concept; Atomic, 
molecular and molar masses; Percentage composition empirical & molecular formula; Balanced 
chemical equations & stoichiometry 
1.3 Three states of matter, intermolecular interactions, types of bonding, melting and boiling points 
Gaseous state: Kinetic energy and molecular speeds; Gas Laws, ideal behavior, ideal gas equation, 
empirical derivation of gas equation, Avogadro number, Deviation from ideal behaviour – Critical 
temperature, Liquefaction of gases, van der Waals equation. 
1.4 Liquid state: Vapour pressure, surface tension, viscosity. 
1.5 Solid state: Classification; Space lattices & crystal systems; Unit cell in two dimensional and three 
dimensional lattices, calculation of density of unit cell – Cubic & hexagonal systems; Close packing; 
Crystal structures: Simple AB and AB 2 type ionic crystals, covalent crystals – diamond & graphite, 
metals. Voids, number of atoms per unit cell in a cubic unit cell, Imperfections- Point defects, non-
stoichiometric crystals; Electrical, magnetic and dielectric properties; Amorphous solids – 
qualitative description. Band theory of metals, condu ctors, semiconductors and insulators, and n- 
and p- type semiconductors. 
2. Atomic Structure 
2.1 Introduction: Subatomic particles; Atomic number, isotopes and isobars, Thompson’s model and 
its limitations, Rutherford’s picture of atom and its limitations; Hydrogen atom spectrum and Bohr 
model and its limitations. 
2.2 Quantum mechanics: Wave -particle duality – de Broglie relation, Uncertainty principle; Hydrogen 
atom: Quantum numbers and wave functions, atomic orbitals and their shapes (s, p, and d), Spin 
quantum number. 
IV  
2.3 Many electron atoms: Pauli exclusion principle; Aufbau principle and the electronic configuration 
of atoms, Hund’s rule. 
3. Periodicity and Bonding 
3.1 Brief history of the development of periodic tables Periodic law and the modern periodic 
table; Types of elements: s, p, d, and f blocks; Periodic trends: ionization energy, atomic, 
and ionic radii, inert gas radii, electron affinity, electro negativity and valency. 
Nomenclature of elements with atomic number greater than 100. 
3.2 Valence electrons, Ionic Bond: Lattice Energy and Born -Haber cycle; Covalent character of ionic 
bonds and polar character of covalent bond, bond parameters 
3.3 Molecular Structure: Lewis picture & resonance structures, VSEPR model & molecular shapes 
3.4 Covalent Bond: Valence Bond Theory- Orbital overlap, Directionality of bonds & hybridization (s, p 
& d orbitals only), Resonance; Molecular orbital theory - Methodology, Orbital energy level 
diagram, Bond order, Magnetic properties for homonuclear diatomic species (qualitative idea only). 
3.5 Dipole moments; Hydrogen Bond. 
 
4. Thermodynamics 
4.1 Basic Concepts: Systems and surroundings; State functions; Intensive & Extensive Properties; 
Zeroth Law and Temperature 
4.2 First Law of Thermodynamics: Work, internal energy, heat, enthalpy, heat capacities and specific 
heats, measurements of ∆U and ∆H, Enthalpies of formation, phase transformation, ionization, 
electron gain; Thermochemistry; Hess’s Law, Enthalpy of bond disso ciation, combustion, 
atomization, sublimation, solution and dilution 
4.3 Second Law: Spontaneous and reversible processes; entropy; Gibbs free energy related to 
spontaneity and non-spontaneity, non-mechanical work; Standard free energies of formation, free 
energy change and chemical equilibrium 
4.4 Third Law: Introduction 
5. Physical and Chemical Equilibria 
5.1 Concentration Units: Mole Fraction, Molarity, and Molality 
5.2 Solutions: Solubility of solids and gases in liquids, Vapour Pressure, Raoult’s law, Relative lowering 
of vapor pressure, depression in freezing point; elevation in boiling point; osmotic pressure, 
determination of molecular mass; solid solutions, abnormal molecular mass, van’t  Hoff factor. 
Equilibrium: Dynamic nature of equilibrium, law of mass action. 
5.3 Physical Equilibrium: Equilibria involving physical changes (solid-liquid, liquid-gas, solid-gas). 
5.4 Chemical Equilibria: Equilibrium constants (K P, K C), Factors affecting equilibrium, Le - Chatelier’s 
principle. 
5.5 Ionic Equilibria: Strong and Weak electrolytes, Acids and Bases (Arrhenius, Lewis, Lowry and 
Bronsted) and their dissociation; degree of ionization, Ionization of Water; ionization of polybasic 
acids, pH; Buffer solutions; Henderson equation, Acid-base titrations; Hydrolysis; Solubility Product 
of Sparingly Soluble Salts; Common Ion Effect. 
5.6 Factors Affecting Equilibria: Concentration, Temperature, Pressure, Catalysts, Significance of ΔG and 
ΔG0 in Chemical Equilibria. 
6. Electrochemistry 
6.1 Redox Reactions: Oxidation -reduction reactions (electron transfer concept); Oxidation number; 
Balancing of redox reactions; Electrochemical cells and cell reactions; Standard electrode potentials; 
EMF of  Galvanic cells; Nernst equation;  Factors affecting the  electrode potential;  Gibbs energy 
change and cell potential; Secondary cells; dry cells, Fuel cells; Corrosion and its prevention. 
V  
6.2 Electrolytic Conduction: Electrolytic Conductance; Specific and molar conductivities; variations of 
conductivity with concentration, Kolhrausch’s Law and its application, Electrolysis, Faraday’s 
laws of electrolysis; Electrode potential and electrolysis. 
7. Chemical Kinetics 
7.1 Aspects of Kinetics: Rate and Rate expression of a reaction; Rate constant; Order and molecularity 
of the reaction; Integrated rate expressions and half-life for zero and first order reactions. 
7.2 Factor Affecting the Rate of the Reactions: Concentration of the reactants, catalyst; size of particles, 
Temperature dependence of rate constant concept of collision theory (elementary idea, no 
mathematical treatment); Activation energy, Arrhenius Equation. 
7.3 Surface Chemistry: Adsorption – physisorption and chemisorption; factors affecting adsorption of 
gasses on solids; catalysis: homogeneous and heterogeneous, activity and selectivity: enzyme 
catalysis, colloidal state: distinction between true solutions, colloids and suspensions; lyophillic, 
lyophobic multi molecular and macromolecular colloids; pro perties of colloids; Tyndall effect, 
Brownian movement, electrophoresis, coagulations; emulsions–types of emulsions. 
8. Hydrogen and s-block elements 
8.1 Hydrogen: Element: unique position in periodic table, occurrence, isotopes; Dihydrogen: 
preparation, properties, reactions, and uses; Molecular, saline, ionic, covalent,  interstitial hydrides; 
Water: Properties; Structure and aggregation of water molecules; Heavy water; Hydrogen peroxide: 
preparation, reaction, structure & use, Hydrogen as a fuel. 
8.2 s-block elements: Abundance and occurrence; Anomalous properties of the first elements in each 
group; diagonal relationships; trends in the variation of properties (ionization energy, atomic & 
ionic radii). 
8.3 Alkali metals: Lithium, sodium and potassium: occurrence, extraction, reactivity, and electrode 
potentials; Biological importance; Reactions with oxygen, hydrogen, halogens and water; Basic 
nature of oxides and hydroxides; Halides; Properties and uses of compounds such as NaCl, Na2CO3, 
NaHCO3, NaOH, KCl, and KOH. 
8.4 Alkaline earth metals: Magnesium and calcium: Occurrence, extraction, reactivity and electrode 
potentials; Reactions with O 2, H2O, H2 and halogens; Solubility and thermal stability of oxo salts; 
Biological importance of Ca and Mg; Preparation, properties and uses of important compounds 
such as CaO, Ca(OH)2, plaster of Paris, MgSO4, MgCl2, CaCO3, and CaSO4. 
9. p- d- and f-block elements 
9.1 General: Abundance, distribution, physical and chemical properties, isolation and uses of elements; 
Trends in chemical reactivity of elements of a group; electronic configuration, oxidation states; 
anomalous properties of first element of each group. 
9.2 Group 13 elements: Boron; Properties and uses of borax, boric acid, boron hydrides & halides. 
Reaction of aluminum with acids and alkalis; 
9.3 Group 14 elements: Carbon: carbon catenation, physical & chemical properties, uses, allotropes 
(graphite, diamond, fullerenes), oxides, halides and sulphides, carbides; Silicon: Silica, silicates, 
silicone, silicon tetrachloride, Zeolites, and their uses 
9.4 Group 15 elements: Dinitrogen; Preparation, reactivity and uses of nitrogen; Industrial and 
biological nitrogen fixation; Compound of nitrogen; Ammonia: Haber’s process, properties and 
reactions; Oxides of nitrogen and their structures; Properties and Ostw ald’s process of nitric acid 
production; Fertilizers – NPK type; Production of phosphorus; Allotropes of phosphorus; 
Preparation, structure and properties of hydrides, oxides, oxoacids (elementary idea only) and 
halides of phosphorus, phosphine. 
9.5 Group 16 elements: Isolation and chemical reactivity of dioxygen; Acidic, basic and amphoteric 
oxides; Preparation, structure and properties of ozone; Allotropes of sulphur; 
Preparation/production properties and uses of sulphur dioxide and sulphuric acid; Structure and 
properties of oxides, oxoacids (structures only). 
VI  
9.6 Group 17 and group 18 elements: Structure and properties of hydrides, oxides, oxoacids of 
halogens (structures only); preparation, properties & uses of chlorine & HCl; Inter halogen 
compounds; Bleaching Powder; Uses of Group 18 elements, Preparation, structure and reactions of 
xenon fluorides, oxides, and oxoacids. 
9.7 d-Block elements: General trends in the chemistry of first row transition elements; Metallic 
character; Oxidation state; ionization enthalpy; Ionic radii; Color; Catalytic properties; Magnetic 
properties; Interstitial compounds; Occurrence and extraction o f iron, copper, silver, zinc, and 
mercury; Alloy formation; Steel and some important alloys; preparation and properties of K2Cr2O7, 
KMnO4. 
9.8 f-Block elements: Lanthanoids and actinoids ; Oxidation states and chemical reactivity of 
lanthanoids compounds; Lanthanide contraction and its consequences, Comparison of actinoids 
and lanthanoids. 
9.9 Coordination Compounds: Coordination number; Ligands; Werner’s coordination theory; IUPAC 
nomenclature; Application and importance of coordination compounds (in qualitative analysis, 
extraction of metals and biological systems e.g. chlorophyll, vitamin B12 , and hemoglobin); 
Bonding: Valence -bond approach, Crystal field theory (qualitative); Isomerism including 
stereoisomerisms. 
10. Principles of Organic Chemistry and Hydrocarbons 
10.1 Classification: General Introduction, classification based on functional groups, trivial and IUPAC 
nomenclature. Methods of purification: qualitative and quantitative, 
10.2 Electronic displacement in a covalent bond: Inductive, resonance effects, and hyperconjugation; 
free radicals; carbocations, carbanions, nucleophiles and electrophiles; types of organic reactions, 
free radial halogenations. 
10.3 Alkanes: Structural isomerism, general properties and chemical reactions, free redical helogenation, 
combustion and pyrolysis. 
10.4 Alkenes and alkynes: Structure of double and triple bonded compounds; General methods of 
preparation and reactions, physical properties, electrophilic and free radical additions, addition of 
hydrogen, halogen, water, hydrogen halides; (Markovnikov’s addition and peroxide effect), 
ozonolysis, oxidation, mechanism of electrophilic addition; acidic character of alkynes and (1,2 and 
1,4) addition to dienes. 
10.5 Aromatic hydrocarbons: Sources; properties; isomerism; resonance delocalization; aromaticity; 
polynuclear hydrocarbons; IUPAC nomenclature; mechanism of electrophilic substitution reaction, 
directive influence and effect of substituents on reactivity; carcinogenicity and toxicity. 
10.6 Haloalkanes and haloarenes: Physical properties, nomenclature, optical rotation, chemical reactions 
and mechanism of substitution reaction. Uses and environmental effects; di, tri, 
tetrachloromethanes, iodoform, freon and DDT. 
11. Stereochemistry 
11.1 Conformations: Ethane conformations; Newman and Sawhorse projections. 
11.2 Geometrical isomerism in alkenes 
12. Organic Compounds with Functional Groups Containing Oxygen and Nitrogen 
12.1 General: Nomenclature, electronic structure, important methods of preparation, identification, 
important reactions, physical and chemical properties, uses of alcohols, phenols, ethers, aldehydes, 
ketones, carboxylic acids, nitro compounds, amines, diazonium salts, cyanides and isocyanides. 
12.2 Specific: Reactivity of alpha -hydrogen in carbonyl compounds, effect of substituents on alpha - 
carbon on acid strength, comparative reactivity of acid derivatives, mechanism of nucleophilic 
addition and dehydration, basic character of amines, methods of preparation, and their separation, 
importance of diazonium salts in synthetic organic chemistry. 
VII  
13. Biological, Industrial and Environmental chemistry 
13.1 Carbohydrates: Classification; Monosaccharides; Structures of pentoses and hexoses; Simple 
chemical reactions of glucose, Disaccharides: reducing and non-reducing sugars – sucrose, maltose 
and lactose; Polysaccharides: elementary idea of structures of starch, cellulose and glycogen. 
13.2 Proteins: Amino acids; Peptide bond; Polypeptides; Primary structure of proteins; Simple idea of 
secondary, tertiary and quaternary structures of proteins; Denaturation of proteins and enzymes.  
13.3 Nucleic Acids: Types of nucleic acids; Primary building blocks of nucleic acids (chemical 
composition of DNA & RNA); Primary structure of DNA and its double helix.  
13.4 Vitamins: Classification, structure, functions in biosystems; Hormones. 
13.5 Polymers: Classification of polymers; General methods of polymerization; Molecular mass of 
polymers; Biopolymers and biodegradable polymers; methods of polymerization (free radical, 
cationic and anionic addition polymerizations); Copolymerization: Natural rubber; Vulcanization of 
rubber; Synthetic rubbers. Condensation polymers. Some important polymers: natural and 
synthetic like polythene, nylon, polyesters, bakelite, and rubber. 
13.6 Pollution: Environmental pollutants; soil, water and air pollution; Chemical reactions in atmosphere; 
Smog; Major atmospheric pollutants; Acid rain; Ozone and its reactions; Depletion  of ozone layer 
and its effects; Industrial air pollution; Greenhouse effect and global warming; Green Chemistry, 
study for control of environmental pollution. 
13.7 Chemicals in medicine, health -care and food: Analgesics, Tranquilizers, antiseptics, disinfectants, 
anti-microbials, anti -fertility drugs, antihistamines, antibiotics, antacids; Preservatives, artificial 
sweetening agents, antioxidants, soaps and detergents. 
14. Theoretical Principles of Experimental Chemistry 
14.1 Volumetric Analysis: Principles; Standard solutions of sodium carbonate and oxalic acid; Acid- base 
titrations; Redox reactions involving KI, H2SO4, Na2SO3, Na2S2O3 and H2S; Potassium permanganate 
in acidic, basic and neutral media; Titrations of oxalic acid, ferrous ammonium sulphate with 
KMnO4, K2 Cr2O7/Na2S2O3, Cu(II)/Na2S2O3. 
14.2 Qualitative analysis of Inorganic Salts: Principles in the determination of the cations Pb 2+, Cu2+, 
As3+, Mn2+, Al3+, Zn2+, Co2+, Ca2+, Sr2+, Ba2+, Mg2+, NH4+, Fe3+, Ni2+ and the anions CO32-, S2-, SO42-
, SO32-, NO2-, NO3-, Cl-, Br-, I-, PO43-, CH3COO-, C2O42-. 
14.3 Physical Chemistry Experiments: preparation and crystallization of alum, copper sulphate. Benzoic 
acid ferrous sulphate, double salt of alum and ferrous sulphate, potassium ferric sulphate; 
Temperature vs. solubility; Study of pH charges by common ion effect in case of weak acids and 
weak bases; pH measurements of some solutions obtained from fruit juices, solutions of known 
and varied concentrations of acids, bases and salts using pH paper or universal indicator; Lyophilic 
and lyophobic sols; Dialysis; Role of emulsifying ag ents in emulsification. Equilibrium studies 
involving ferric and thiocyanate ions (ii) [Co(H2O)6]2+ and chloride ions; Enthalpy determination for 
strong acid vs. strong base neutralization reaction (ii) hydrogen bonding interaction between 
acetone and chloroform; Rates of the reaction between (i) sodium thiosulphate and hydrochloric 
acid, (ii) potassium iodate and sodium sulphite ( iii) iodide vs. hydrogen peroxide, concentration 
and temperature effects in these reactions. 
14.4 Purification Methods: Filtration, crystallization, sublimation, distillation, differential extraction, and 
chromatography. Principles of melting point and boiling point determination; principles of paper 
chromatographic separation – Rf values. 
14.5 Qualitative Analysis of Organic Compounds: Detection of nitrogen, sulphur, phosphorous and 
halogens; Detection of carbohydrates, fats and proteins in foodstuff; Detection of alcoholic, 
phenolic, aldehydic, ketonic, carboxylic, amino groups and unsaturation. 
VIII  
14.6 Principles of Organic Chemistry Experiments: Preparation of, acetanilide, p-nitro acetanilide, di- 
benzayl acetone, aniline yellow, beta-naphthol-aniline dye. 
14.7 Basic Laboratory Technique: Cutting glass tube and glass rod, bending a glass tube, drawing out 
a glass jet, boring of cork. 
 
Part III: (a) English Proficiency and (b) Logical Reasoning 
(a) English Proficiency 
This test is designed to assess the test takers’ general proficiency in the use of English language as a means 
of self-expression in real life situations. It specifically tests the test takers’ knowledge of basic grammar, 
their vocabulary, their ability to read fast and comprehend, and also their ability to apply the elements of 
effective writing. 
1. Grammar 
1.1 Determiners, Prepositions, Modals, Adjectives, Relative Pronouns 
1.2 Agreement, Time and Tense 
1.3 Parallel Construction 
1.4 Voice, Transformation 
1.5 Question Tags, Relative Clauses 
2. Vocabulary 
2.1 Odd Word, One Word, Spelling & Word Formation, Homophones 
2.2 Contextual Meanings of Vocabulary (Definitions, Academic Vocabulary, Connotation) 
2.3 Synonyms, Antonyms, Collocations 
2.4 Phrasal Verbs & Idioms 
2.5 Analogy 
3. Reading Comprehension 
3.1 Content/Ideas (Finding Main Ideas, Reaching Conclusions Using Supporting Evidence, Anticipation 
of Ideas, Distinguishing Facts from Opinions) 
3.2 Vocabulary (Figurative Usage: Metaphors and Similes; Select CLOZE) 
3.3 Summary (Findings from Options the Correct Summary) 
3.4 Referents 
3.5 Reorganization of Information (Jigsaw Reading) 
4. Composition 
4.1 Rearrangement (Word Order; Logical Organization of Paragraph) 
4.2 Paragraph & Unity (Identifying the Correct Topic Sentence;) 
4.3 Linkers/Connectives 
(b) Logical Reasoning 
The test is given to the candidates to judge their power of reasoning spread in verbal and nonverbal areas. 
The candidates should be able to think logically so that they perceive the data accurately, understand the 
relationships correctly, figure out the missing numbers or words, and apply rules in novel contexts. These 
indicators are measured through performance on such tasks as detecting missing links, following directions, 
classifying words, establishing sequences, and completing analogies.  
 
  
IX  
5. Verbal Reasoning 
5.1 Analogy: Analogy means correspondence. In the questions based on analogy, a particular 
relationship is given and another similar relationship has to be identified from the alternatives 
provided. 
5.2 Classification: Classification means to assort the items of a given group on the basis of certain 
common quality they possess and then spot the odd option out. 
5.3 Series Completion: Here series of numbers or letters are given and one is asked to either complete 
the series or find out the wrong part in the series. 
5.4 Logical Deduction: Reading Passage: Here a brief passage is given and based on the passage the 
candidate is required to identify the correct or incorrect logical conclusions.  
5.5 Chart Logic: Here a chart or a table is given that is partially filled in and asks to complete it in 
accordance with the information given either in the chart / table or in the question.  
6. Nonverbal Reasoning 
6.1 Pattern Perception: Here a certain pattern is given and generally a quarter is left blank. The 
candidate is required to identify the correct quarter from the given options.  
6.2 Figure Formation and Analysis: Here the candidate is required to analyze and form a figure from 
the various given parts. 
6.3 Paper Cutting: Here the candidate analyses a pattern that is formed when a folded piece of paper 
is cut into a definite design. 
6.4 Figure Matrix: Here the candidate is given more than one set of figures in the form of a matrix, 
which follow the same rule. The candidate is required to follow the rule and identify the missing 
figure. 
6.5 Rule Detection: Here a particular rule is given and the candidate is required to select from the 
given sets of figures, a set of figures, which obey the rule and form the correct series.  
Part IV: Mathematics 
1. Algebra 
1.1 Complex numbers, addition, multiplication, conjugation, polar representation, properties of 
modulus and principal argument, triangle inequality, roots of complex numbers, geometric 
interpretations; Fundamental theorem of algebra. 
1.2 Theory of Quadratic equations, quadratic equations in real and complex number system and their 
solutions. 
1.3 Arithmetic and geometric progressions, arithmetic, geometric and arithmetico geometric series, 
sums of finite arithmetic and geometric progressions, infinite geometric series, sums of squares 
and cubes of the first n natural numbers. 
1.4 Logarithms and their properties. 
1.5 Exponential series. 
1.6 Permutations and combinations, Permutations as an arrangement and combination as selection, 
simple applications. 
1.7 Binomial theorem for a positive integral index, properties of binomial coefficients, Pascal’s triangle 
1.8 Matrices and determinants of order two or three, properties and evaluation of determinants, 
addition and multiplication of matrices, adjoint and inverse of matrices, Solutions of simultaneous 
linear equations in two or three variables, elementary row and column operations of matrices, 
Types of matrices, applications of determinants in finding the area of triangles. 
X  
1.9 Sets, Relations and Functions, algebra of sets applications, equivalence relations, mappings, one to 
one, into and onto mappings, composition of mappings, binary operation, inverse of function, 
functions of real variables like polynomial, modulus, signum and greatest integer.  
1.10 Mathematical reasoning and methods of proofs, mathematically acceptable statements. 
Connecting words/phrases – consolidating the understanding of “if and only if (necessary and 
sufficient) condition”, “implies”, “and/or”, “implied” by”, “and”, “or”, “there exists” and through 
variety of examples related to real life and Mathematics. Valid ating the statements involving the 
connecting words – difference between contradiction, converse and contra positive, Mathematical 
induction 
1.11 Linear Inequalities, solution of linear inequalities in one variable (Algebraic) and two variables 
(Graphical). 
2. Trigonometry 
2.1 Measurement of angles in radians and degrees, positive and negative angles, trigonometric ratios, 
functions with their graphs and identities. 
2.2 Solution of trigonometric equations. 
2.3 Inverse trigonometric functions 
3. Two-dimensional Coordinate Geometry 
3.1 Cartesian coordinates, distance between two points, section formulae, shift of origin. 
3.2 Straight lines and pair of straight lines: Equation of straight lines in various forms, angle between 
two lines, distance of a point from a line, lines through the point of intersection of two given lines, 
equation of the bisector of the angle between two lines, concurrent lines. 
3.3 Circles: Equation of circle in standard form, parametric equations of a circle. 
3.4 Conic sections: parabola, ellipse and hyperbola their eccentricity, directrices & foci. 
4. Three dimensional Coordinate Geometry 
4.1 Co-ordinate axes and co-ordinate planes, distance between two points, section formula, direction 
cosines and direction ratios, equation of a straight line in space and skew lines.  
4.2 Angle between two lines whose direction ratios are given, shortest distance between two lines. 
4.3 Equation of a plane, distance of a point from a plane, condition for coplanarity of three lines, angles 
between two planes, angle between a line and a plane. 
5. Differential calculus 
5.1 Domain and range of a real valued function, Limits and Continuity of the sum, difference, product 
and quotient of two functions, Differentiability. 
5.2 Derivative of different types of functions (polynomial, rational, trigonometric, inverse 
trigonometric, exponential, logarithmic, implicit functions), derivative of the sum, difference, 
product and quotient of two functions, chain rule, parametric form. 
5.3 Geometric interpretation of derivative, Tangents and Normal. 
5.4 Increasing and decreasing functions, Maxima and minima of a function. 
5.5 Rolle’s Theorem, Mean Value Theorem and Intermediate Value Theorem. 
6. Integral calculus 
6.1 Integration as the inverse process of differentiation, indefinite integrals of standard functions. 
6.2 Methods of integration: Integration by substitution, Integration by parts, integration by partial 
fractions, and integration by trigonometric identities. 
6.3 Definite integrals and their properties, Fundamental Theorem of Integral Calculus, applications in 
finding areas under simple curves. 
6.4 Application of definite integrals to the determination of areas of regions bounded by simple curves. 
XI  
7. Ordinary Differential Equations 
7.1 Order and degree of a differential equation, formulation of a differential equation whole general 
solution is given, variables separable method. 
7.2 Solution of homogeneous differential equations of first order and first degree 
7.3 Linear first order differential equations 
8. Probability 
8.1 Various terminology in probability, axiomatic and other approaches of probability, addition and 
multiplication rules of probability. 
8.2 Conditional probability, total probability and Baye’s theorem 
8.3 Independent events 
8.4 Discrete random variables and distributions with mean and variance. 
9. Vectors 
9.1 Direction ratio/cosines of vectors, addition of vectors, scalar multiplication, position vector of a 
point dividing a line segment in a given ratio. 
9.2 Dot and cross products of two vectors, projection of a vector on a line. 
9.3 Scalar triple products and their geometrical interpretations. 
10. Statistics 
10.1 Measures of dispersion 
10.2 Analysis of frequency distributions with equal means but different variances 
11. Linear Programming 
11.1 Various terminology and formulation of linear Programming 
11.2 Solution of linear Programming using graphical method, feasible and infeasible regions, feasible 
and infeasible solutions, optimal feasible solutions (upto three nonitrivial constraints)  
12. Mathematical modeling 
12.1 Formulation of simple real life problem, solution using matrices, calculus and linear programming. 
Part IV: Biology 
1: Diversity in Living World 
1.1 Biology – its meaning and relevance to mankind 
1.2 What is living; Taxonomic categories and aids; Systematics and Binomial system of nomenclature. 
1.3 Introductory classification of living organisms (Two-kingdom system, Five-kingdom system); 
1.4 Plant kingdom – Salient features of major groups (Algae to Angiosperms); 
1.5 Animal kingdom – Salient features of Nonchordates up to phylum, and Chordates up to class level. 
2: Cell: The Unit of Life; Structure and Function 
2.1 Cell wall; Cell membrane; Endomembrane system (ER, Golgi apparatus/Dictyosome, Lysosomes, 
Vacuoles); Mitochondria; Plastids; Ribosomes; Cytoskeleton; Cilia and Flagella; Centrosome and 
Centriole; Nucleus; Microbodies. 
2.2 Structural differences between prokaryotic and eukaryotic, and between plant and animal cells. 
2.3 Cell cycle (various phases); Mitosis; Meiosis. 
2.4 Biomolecules – Structure and function of Carbohydrates, Proteins, Lipids, and Nucleic acids. 
2.5 Enzymes – Chemical nature, types, properties and mechanism of action. 
3: Genetics and Evolution 
3.1 Mendelian inheritance; Chromosome theory of inheritance; Gene interaction; Incomplete 
dominance; Co-dominance; Complementary genes; Multiple alleles; 
3.2 Linkage and Crossing over; Inheritance patterns of hemophilia and blood groups in humans. 
XII  
3.3 DNA –its organization and replication; Transcription and Translation; 
3.4 Gene expression and regulation; DNA fingerprinting. 
3.5 Theories and evidences of evolution, including modern Darwinism. 
4: Structure and Function – Plants 
4.1 Morphology of a flowering plant; Tissues and tissue systems in plants; Anatomy and function of 
root, stem (including modifications), leaf, inflorescence, flower (including position and arrangement 
of different whorls, placentation), fruit and seed; Types of fruit; Secondary growth;  
4.2 Absorption and movement of water (including diffusion, osmosis and water relations of cell) and 
of nutrients; Translocation of food; Transpiration and gaseous exchange; Mechanism of stomatal 
movement. 
4.3 Mineral nutrition – Macro- and micro-nutrients in plants including deficiency disorders; Biological 
nitrogen fixation mechanism. 
4.4 Photosynthesis – Light reaction, cyclic and non-cyclic photophosphorylation; various pathways of 
carbon dioxide fixation; Photorespiration; Limiting factors. 
4.5 Respiration – Anaerobic, Fermentation, Aerobic; Glycolysis, TCA cycle; Electron transport system; 
Energy relations. 
5: Structure and Function - Animals 
5.1 Human Physiology – Digestive system – organs, digestion and absorption; Respiratory system – 
organs, breathing and exchange and transport of gases. 
5.2 Body fluids and circulation – Blood, lymph, double circulation, regulation of cardiac activity; 
Hypertension, Coronary artery diseases. 
5.3 Excretion system – Urine formation, regulation of kidney function 
5.4 Locomotion and movement – Skeletal system, joints, muscles, types of movement. 
5.5 Control and co -ordination – Central and peripheral nervous systems, structure and function of 
neuron, reflex action and sensory reception; Role of various types of endocrine glands; Mechanism 
of hormone action. 
6: Reproduction, Growth and Movement in Plants 
6.1 Asexual methods of reproduction; 
6.2 Sexual Reproduction – Development of male and female gametophytes; Pollination (Types and 
agents); Fertilization; Development of embryo, endosperm, seed and fruit (including parthenocarpy 
and elminth). 
6.3 Growth and Movement – Growth phases; Types of growth regulators and their role in seed 
dormancy, germination and movement; 
6.4 Apical dominance; Senescence; Abscission; Photo- periodism; Vernalisation; 
6.5 Various types of movements. 
7: Reproduction and Development in Humans 
7.1 Male and female reproductive systems; 
7.2 Menstrual cycle; Gamete production; Fertilisation; Implantation; 
7.3 Embryo development; 
7.4 Pregnancy and parturition; 
7.5 Birth control and contraception. 
8: Ecology and Environment 
8.1 Meaning of ecology, environment, habitat and niche. 
8.2 Ecological levels of organization (organism to biosphere); Characteristics of Species, Population, 
Biotic Community and Ecosystem; Succession and Climax. Ecosystem – Biotic and abiotic 
components; Ecological pyramids; Food chain and Food web; 
XIII  
8.3 Energy flow; Major types of ecosystems including agroecosystem. 
8.4 Ecological adaptations – Structural and physiological features in plants and animals of aquatic and 
desert habitats. 
8.5 Biodiversity and Environmental Issues – Meaning, types and conservation strategies (Biosphere  
reserves, National parks and Sanctuaries), Air and Water Pollution (sources and major pollutants); 
Global warming and Climate change; Ozone depletion; Noise pollution; Radioactive pollution; 
Methods of pollution control (including an idea of bioremediation ); Deforestation; Extinction of 
species (Hot Spots). 
9: Biology and Human Welfare 
9.1 Animal husbandry – Livestock, Poultry, Fisheries; Major animal diseases and their control. 
Pathogens of major communicable diseases of humans caused by fungi, bacteria, viruses, 
protozoans and helminthes, and their control. 
9.2 Cancer; AIDS. 
9.3 Adolescence and drug/alcohol abuse; 
9.4 Basic concepts of immunology. 
9.5 Plant Breeding and Tissue Culture in crop improvement. 
10: Biotechnology and its Applications 
10.1 Microbes as ideal system for biotechnology; 
10.2 Microbial technology in food processing, industrial production (alcohol, acids, enzymes, 
antibiotics), sewage treatment and energy generation. 
10.3 Steps in recombinant DNA technology – restriction enzymes, NA insertion by vectors and other 
methods, regeneration of recombinants 
10.4 Applications of R-DNA technology in human health –Production of Insulin, Vaccines and Growth 
hormones, Organ transplant, Gene therapy. 
10.5 Applications in Industry and Agriculture – Production of expensive enzymes, strain improvement to 
scale up bioprocesses, GM crops by transfer of genes for nitrogen fixation, herbicide-resistance and 
pest-resistance including Bt crops. 
 